
SOURCE: 11PlusLeapCEM22B.pdf (Page 3 - Routed to non-verbal)
 
 
 
Go to the next page  Page 3  Opposite Words  
A B C D E 
sensible  uncanny  indiscreet  weak  foolish  canny  
A B C D E 
rocky  exhausted  weak  uncertain  secure  hardy  
A B C D E 
A B C D E rhythmic  rural  polished  plain  calm  frenetic  
neglect  safe stop  discard  loose  keep  A B C D E 
attentive  inert  awake  excited  dynamic  dormant  
3 1 
2 
4 
5 
A B C D E 
return  refuse  take  profit  plain  donate  
A B C D E 
exacting  irregular  flexible  steady  busy  fluctuating  6 
7 

SOURCE: GL-Revision-Course-Preview.pdf (Page 22 - Routed to non-verbal)
 
© Learning Street  In these questions you are given an image and then 
asked whi ch of the options is a rotation of the original. 
This sounds simple but you will need to pay close attention to the options because there is 
normally plenty there that could trip you up.  
 
What to look out for  
Typically rotations questions will have two elements, there will be a main shape which rotates 
and potentially a secondary item ( such as di agonal lines or hatched shading) which may also 
rotate. 
• Remember firstly that the best way to think of rotations is to stick a pin in the middle 
of the shape and then turn it in either a clockwise or anti -clockwise direction.  
• Shapes are normally rotated through 90,  180 or 270 degrees clockwise or anti -
clockwise.  
• Shapes are often irregular so that it is not as easy as one would think to see h ow they 
have been rotated.  
• There will often be mirror reflections put into the options which can confuse. Remember you are looking for a rotation not a reflection.  
• You will often end up with two options and you should pause and re -double your 
concentration  at this point. A good way to approach this is to try to find out why one of 
the two options is wrong rather than focussing on finding the correct one. You can 
otherwise leap to the wrong answer.  
 
Technique Tips  
Some people are naturally better at these sorts of questions as they enter into the spatial 
awareness area. However each pupil should focus on helping themselves be the best they can be.  
The only way to do this is by focussing on the example questions and spending enough time on 
them  individ ually. By j ust doing question after question will do you little good.  
 
• If you are not a natural at this, don’t be frightened of turning the page to get a feel for 
the rotation.  
• If you have two options ( having excluded others) then remember there will be something 
wrong with one of them.  
• Pay attention to the detail. If there is a shape with a filling then the filling is important. Lines,  for instance , should be p ointing in the same direction ( just rotated).  
• Be ready for more difficult questions with more than two elements, where you see these 
all elements should be subject to the same rotation. 
 3. ROTATIONS  / TYPE 3  
Example  
 Explanation  We have identified  13 core 
types of non -verbal 
reasoning question children 
could face in the 11 Plus 
exam. In the first part of 
the Revision Course we 
recap key technique points 
for each question type 
before giving 5 questions to try. This sheet looks at 
rotations questions.  
Only one of the answers is a rotation of the original. D is the only possible 
answer as it is the only hand with the thumb still on the left hand side. 
The lines also go from the bottom left of the hand to the top right.  
 

SOURCE: GL-Revision-Course-Preview.pdf (Page 23 - Routed to non-verbal)
© Learning Street  
  
 
  
 
 
 8. NETS   / TYPE  8 
1 
3 2 
4 
5 
We believe it is important 
to first be confident with 
the technique for each 
question type before moving 
on to full timed tests in the 
rest of the course. Detailed answers are given for every 
question to help you 
understand where you have gone wrong. These nets 
questions can be very tricky 
at first, but become simple once you’ve mastered the 
technique!  

SOURCE: GL-Revision-Course-Preview.pdf (Page 25 - Routed to non-verbal)
© Learning Street 31.LIKE SHAPES / TYPE 1
Example 
1 
2 Work out which of the answer shapes is 
related to the question shape in the 
same way that the example shapes are 
related.

